Audio networking refers to transmitting information via sound. Traditionally, we send data
over copper wire or optical fibre (or radio waves for wireless communication). That, however,
requires existing infrastructure, which takes time and money to implement. On the other hand,
communicating via sound only requires participants to have a pair of speakers and microphones.
However, audio networking has some significant disadvantages. In particular, short range and
susceptibility to noise make such communication inefficient and difficult, compared to its copper
(or radio) counter-parts. Care must be taken when designing protocols to accommodate for errors
introduced by the noise.
1.1 Motivation
Audio networking, due to its unique draw-backs and strengths can be well-suited to various use
cases.
Infrastructure free communication
As mentioned above, audio networking only requires participants to have a functional microphone
and speakers (and some means to operate on the received data). Often a facility may have an
infrastructure for broadcasting/sending audio signals, but lacks capabilities for wired or radio
communication. Audio networking allows us to still communicate digital data without any change
to the infrastructure, and hence is cheaper and faster. Apart from cheaper infrastructure, we also
get faster deployment (since there is no infrastructure to deploy).
Limited range
Beyond infrastructure-free communication this may have other benefits. Limited range provides
privacy – since sound waves have limited range compared to radio, renders eavesdropping im-
practical. This may be useful, for example, for exchanging keys for encryption to jump-start the
communication if the participants are close enough to each other.
Richer audio
We tend to use sole audio signals for many uses - explaining things to the user, playing back songs,
alarms etc. We might sometimes wish for additional channels for such signals that might not be
available. E.g. play a video to the user, or display lyrics for a song, or describe what triggered the
alarm. Using audio networking, we might be able to embed data into the recordings, and if the
user wishes, they may access the additional data, without compromising the original use.
Covert communication
Due to the abundance of audio noise in most circumstances, we may be able to hide signals below
the noise level. To a third-party, it may sound just like a noise, however, participants who know
the parameters of the scheme might still be able to communicate. Combined with the limited
range, this may make detecting the presence of such communication difficult.
1
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION 2
1.2 Project overview
The project implements multiple schemes for communicating using sound, utilising .WAV files to
store and play the generated signal. In addition, we simulate the noise associated with the trans-
mission. The goal is, given arbitrary bytes, we need to encode the bytes into an audio signal (and
store it into a .WAV file). Accompanying decoder should then be able to decode the audio output
back into the original bytes, even in presence of some noise.
Original Data
Encoder
Audio file
Noise generator
Audio file
Decoder
Decoded Data
Sender
Transmission
Receiver
Figure 1.1: Overview of simulating transmission
Multiple coding schemes were implemented as well as noise simulators (each exploring different
facet of transmission noise). Each encoding scheme can be enriched with Forward Error Correction
(namely Reed Solomon encoding)